README.md, before:

spanner
=======

[![codecov.io](https://codecov.io/github/sandhje/spanner/coverage.svg?branch=master)](https://codecov.io/github/sandhje/spanner?branch=master)

A framework agnostic configuration package.

Installation
------------

1.  Add composer to your project, see https://getcomposer.org/

2.  Add this github repository to the repositories element in your composer.json
    and add the dev stability flag (Note: once stable this package will be
    published on packagist and this step will no longer be necessary)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
"minimum-stability" : "dev",
"prefer-stable": true,
"repositories" : [ {
    "type" : "composer",
    "url" : "https://packagist.org/"
}, {
    "type": "vcs"
    "url": "https://github.com/sandhje/spanner.git",
} ]
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1.  Add the package to the require element in your composer.json

    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
    "require" : {
    "sandhje/spanner" : "*"
    },
    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

2.  Run `composer install`

Requirements
------------

The following PHP versions are supported by this version.

-   PHP 5.5

-   PHP 5.6

-   PHP 7

-   HHVM

Main concepts
-------------

Spanner is build up around three main parts: the Config class, Resources and
ConfigCollections.

A resource contains configuration data. Each Resource is passed a strategy,
responsible for translating the result of the load operation on the resource to
a associative array. The config class allows access through it's public methods
to the translated data and returns that data as a ConfigCollection.

Configuration data is organized in regions and can be overwritten with data in
an environment if one is set. E.g. if the environment 'local' is set and it
contains configuration data, that data is merged with the 'default'
configuration data. In case of duplicate data the environment configuration data
overwrites the 'default' data. Besides overwriting configuration data with an
environment file, configuration data can also be overwritten from within your
code by calling the Config::set method, data set through this method overwrites
both the default and environment specific configuration data.

Spanner is designed to be extended, you can easily create your own resources and
strategies to tailor the package to your needs.

Basic usage example
-------------------

Given the configuration data is inside the folder "/path/to/config" and consists
of a file called database.yml.

#### Setup the configuration class:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Sandhje\Spanner\Config;
use Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\LocalFilesystemResource;
use Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\Strategy\YamlStrategy;

$resource = new LocalFilesystemResource('/path/to/config', new YamlStrategy());

$config = new Config();
$config->setEnvironment("local")
    ->attachResource($resource);
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#### Load the data in the region 'database':

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$collection = $config->get("database");
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This returns all the data in "database.yml" and merges that data with
"local/database.yml" if available.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$item = $config->get("database", "host");
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This returns the item "host" in "database.yml" and overwrites it with the item
"host" in "local/database.yml" if available.

#### Use the configuration data:

`Config::get` returns either a ConfigCollection in case an entire region is
loaded or a ConfigItem in case a single item is loaded.

You can loop over the values in a ConfigCollection to get the ConfigItems inside
it:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
foreach($collection->getIterator() as $item) { }
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Get one item in the ConfigCollection:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$item = $collection->get("host");
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Or export the collection to a array:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$array = $collection->toArray();
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

From the ConfigItem you can get the key and value:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$key = $item->getKey();
$value = $item->getValue();
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Environments
------------

The config class can take on or more environments which are passed to the
resource when loading configuration data. It’s up to the resource to map this
environment to a specific file, database table, etc.

When data is requested the resource will receive a load requests from most
“general” (without environment) to most “specific” (the deepest environment).
E.g. if you pass the environment “local” and request the data in the “database”
region the resource will receive two requests:

1.  Load region “database”.

2.  Load region “database” from environment “local”.

The result from the second request is merged with the result from the first,
overwriting any duplicate data in the general “database” region with that from
the more specific local “database” region.

if the general “database” region contains:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
driver: mysql
host: 127.0.0.1
database: foobar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

And the “database” in the environment “local” contains:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
database: foobar_dev
user: root
pass: root
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The result when requesting the configuration data for the region "database" would be:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
driver: mysql
host: 127.0.0.1
database: foobar_dev
user: root
pass: root
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Note how database got overwritten by the value from the more specific
configuration in the environment “local”.

### Layered environment

One can also setup a “layered” environment, e.g. to include language and locale 
in the environment. You can set a layered environment by passing an
array to `Config::setEnvironment`.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$config->setEnvironment(array("en", "US", "local"));
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This results in the following load operations from most “general” to most
“specific”, with each operation mergin with, and overwriting, the data of the
previous ones:

1.  Load region “database”.

2.  Load region “database” from environment “en”.

3.  Load region “database” from environment “US”.

4.  Load region “database” from environment “en/US”.

5.  Load region “database” from environment “local”.

6.  Load region “database” from environment “en/local”.

7.  Load region “database” from environment “en/US/local”.

Caching
-------

All data is cached so performance is kept optimal, which is especially important
when using a layered environment with multiple resources.

Each time the environment or resource get changed the cache is emptied, so it is
best to set everything up all at once early in the request handling process.

Note that `Config::set` does not clear the cache, rather values set through this method get merged with the data from the cache.

Resources
---------

A resource can be anything that holds configuration data, like the local
filesystem, a database, a remote filesystem, etc. Resources are environment
aware, this means that when a load operation is called on the resource and an
environment is setup in the Config class, the resource will search in the
environment location and then in the default location. Currently Spanner comes
with one type of resource: LocalFilesystemResource.

### Usage

The config class provides the attachResource method to add resources.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$config->attachResource(new LocalFilesystemResource('/path/to/config'), new YamlStrategy());
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Any class implementing `Sandje\Spanner\Resource\ResourceInterface` can be
passed. See 'creating your own resource' below for details.

### LocalFilesystemResource

The local filesystem resource serves stuff that is on your local filesystem to
the config class. Upon construction of the LocalFilesystemResource object a path
to the resource location has to be passed, this can be either a file or a
directory.

#### Environments

If the LocalFilesystemResource is passed a directory a load operation without an
environment will translate to loading the contents of `./{file}.{ext}` and if an
environment is passed this will translate to `./{environment}/{file}.{ext}`.

E.g. if the resource’s path is ‘path/to/config’ with a strategy of ‘Array’ and
the region ‘database’ gets loaded while the environment is set to ‘local’ this
translates to: `path/to/config/database.php` and
`path/to/config/local/database.php`

If the LocalFilesystemResource is passed a file a load operation without an
environment will translate to loading the contents of `./{file}.{ext}` and if an
environment is passed this will translate to `./{file}.{environment}.{ext}`.

E.g. if the resource’s path is ‘path/to/config/database.php’ with a strategy of
‘Array’ and the region ‘database’ gets loaded while the environment is set to
‘local’ this translates to: `path/to/config/database.php` and
`path/to/config/database.local.php`

### Creating your own resource

If the inner workings of LocalFilesystemResource do not suit your needs you can
easily create your own resource by creating a class that implements
`\Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\ResourceInterface`. This interface consists of three
methods:

1.  A constructor which is passed the resource and a strategy (a class
    implementing `Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\Strategy\ResourceStrategyInterface`).

2.  A load method which handles the loading of the data in the passed region and
    optionally environment. The environment passed can be a string or an array.
    It also forwards the loaded data to the strategy for translation to an
    associative array. It then returns that array.

3.  A tryLoad method which is basically a wrapper for the load method and
    returns true wen the load operation was successful and false otherwise. It
    receives an array by reference as its first parameter. The result of the
    load method should be assigned to this array.

Strategies
----------

The strategy is responsible for translating the loaded data from the resource to
a multidimensional associative array. Spanner ships with the following
strategies:

-   ArrayStrategy

-   IniStrategy

-   JsonStrategy

-   XmlStrategy

-   YamlStrategy

### Usage

Set the strategy upon instantion of the resource class:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$resource = new LocalFilesystemResource('resource', new YamlStrategy());
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### ArrayStrategy

The array strategy transates .php files from your resource. These files need to
return a single (optionally multidimensional) array. e.g.:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
<?php

return array(
    "driver"       => "mysql",
    "host"         => "127.0.0.1",
    "database"     => "foobar",
    "charset"      => "utf8",
    "collation"    => "utf8_general_ci",
    "prefix"       => "",
);
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Note: This strategy doesn't actually translate the data, but just checks that
it has a valid structure (meaning an array) and returns it.

### IniStrategy

The ini strategy translates .ini files from your resources. These files need to
be valid ini files. Sections are translated to a array. A valid ini
configuration file could look like this:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
driver=mysql
host=127.0.0.1
database=foobar
charset=utf8
collation=utf8_general_ci
prefix=
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### JsonStrategy

The json strategy translates .json files from your resources. These files need
to be valid json files with one root object. A valid json configuration file
could look like this:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
{
    "driver"        : "mysql",
    "host"          : "127.0.0.1",
    "database"      : "foobar",
    "charset"       : "utf8",
    "collation"     : "utf8_general_ci",
    "prefix"        : ""
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### XmlStrategy

The xml strategy translates .xml files from your resources. These files need to
be valid xml files. The element names will be mapped to array keys and the
element contents to the values for the corresponding keys. Nesting elements will
result in a multidimensional array. A xml configuration file could look like
this:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<database>
    <driver>mysql</driver>
    <host>127.0.0.1</host>
    <database>foobar</database>
    <charset>utf8</charset>
    <collation>utf8_general_ci</collation>
    <prefix></prefix>
</database>
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### YamlStrategy

The yaml strategy translates .yml files from your resources. These files need to
be valid yaml files. Symfony's Yaml package is used for loading and translating
yaml files to a (optionally multidimensional) array. A valid yaml configuration
file could look like this:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
driver: mysql
host: 127.0.0.1
database: foobar
charset: utf8
collation: utf8_general_ci
prefix:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### Creating your own strategy

You can easily create your own stratgy by either extending one of the existing
strategy classes that closely matches your needs or by implementing the
`\Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\Strategy\ResourceStrategyinterface`.

Additionally, to create a strategy to be used in the LocalFilesystemResource,
you need to implement the
`Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\Strategy\FilesystemResourceStrategyInterface`. This
interface defines a getFilename method which is used by the resource to get the
file to load including the correct extension.

TODO
----

-   Add database resource and strategies

-   Add docblock comment resource and strategy

-   More thorough exception handling

-   Complete documentation

-   Setup sensiolabs insights analyses

-   Add to packagist

-   Finish this list ;)

Commit message:

Add sensiolabs insight badge and psr compliance statements

README.md, after:

spanner
=======

[![codecov.io](https://codecov.io/github/sandhje/spanner/coverage.svg?branch=master)](https://codecov.io/github/sandhje/spanner?branch=master)
[![SensioLabsInsight](https://insight.sensiolabs.com/projects/4758d67e-71ae-43f5-a7b1-1a1b210a3901/mini.png)](https://insight.sensiolabs.com/projects/4758d67e-71ae-43f5-a7b1-1a1b210a3901)

This package is compliant with [PSR-1], [PSR-2] and [PSR-4]. If you notice compliance oversights,
please send a patch via pull request.

[PSR-1]: https://github.com/php-fig/fig-standards/blob/master/accepted/PSR-1-basic-coding-standard.md
[PSR-2]: https://github.com/php-fig/fig-standards/blob/master/accepted/PSR-2-coding-style-guide.md
[PSR-4]: https://github.com/php-fig/fig-standards/blob/master/accepted/PSR-4-autoloader.md

Description
------------

A framework agnostic configuration package.

Installation
------------

1.  Add composer to your project, see https://getcomposer.org/

2.  Add this github repository to the repositories element in your composer.json
    and add the dev stability flag (Note: once stable this package will be
    published on packagist and this step will no longer be necessary)

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
"minimum-stability" : "dev",
"prefer-stable": true,
"repositories" : [ {
    "type" : "composer",
    "url" : "https://packagist.org/"
}, {
    "type": "vcs"
    "url": "https://github.com/sandhje/spanner.git",
} ]
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1.  Add the package to the require element in your composer.json

    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
    "require" : {
    "sandhje/spanner" : "*"
    },
    ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

2.  Run `composer install`

Requirements
------------

The following PHP versions are supported by this version.

-   PHP 5.5

-   PHP 5.6

-   PHP 7

-   HHVM

Main concepts
-------------

Spanner is build up around three main parts: the Config class, Resources and
ConfigCollections.

A resource contains configuration data. Each Resource is passed a strategy,
responsible for translating the result of the load operation on the resource to
a associative array. The config class allows access through it's public methods
to the translated data and returns that data as a ConfigCollection.

Configuration data is organized in regions and can be overwritten with data in
an environment if one is set. E.g. if the environment 'local' is set and it
contains configuration data, that data is merged with the 'default'
configuration data. In case of duplicate data the environment configuration data
overwrites the 'default' data. Besides overwriting configuration data with an
environment file, configuration data can also be overwritten from within your
code by calling the Config::set method, data set through this method overwrites
both the default and environment specific configuration data.

Spanner is designed to be extended, you can easily create your own resources and
strategies to tailor the package to your needs.

Basic usage example
-------------------

Given the configuration data is inside the folder "/path/to/config" and consists
of a file called database.yml.

#### Setup the configuration class:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
use Sandhje\Spanner\Config;
use Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\LocalFilesystemResource;
use Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\Strategy\YamlStrategy;

$resource = new LocalFilesystemResource('/path/to/config', new YamlStrategy());

$config = new Config();
$config->setEnvironment("local")
    ->attachResource($resource);
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

#### Load the data in the region 'database':

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$collection = $config->get("database");
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This returns all the data in "database.yml" and merges that data with
"local/database.yml" if available.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$item = $config->get("database", "host");
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This returns the item "host" in "database.yml" and overwrites it with the item
"host" in "local/database.yml" if available.

#### Use the configuration data:

`Config::get` returns either a ConfigCollection in case an entire region is
loaded or a ConfigItem in case a single item is loaded.

You can loop over the values in a ConfigCollection to get the ConfigItems inside
it:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
foreach($collection->getIterator() as $item) { }
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Get one item in the ConfigCollection:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$item = $collection->get("host");
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Or export the collection to a array:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$array = $collection->toArray();
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

From the ConfigItem you can get the key and value:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$key = $item->getKey();
$value = $item->getValue();
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Environments
------------

The config class can take on or more environments which are passed to the
resource when loading configuration data. It’s up to the resource to map this
environment to a specific file, database table, etc.

When data is requested the resource will receive a load requests from most
“general” (without environment) to most “specific” (the deepest environment).
E.g. if you pass the environment “local” and request the data in the “database”
region the resource will receive two requests:

1.  Load region “database”.

2.  Load region “database” from environment “local”.

The result from the second request is merged with the result from the first,
overwriting any duplicate data in the general “database” region with that from
the more specific local “database” region.

if the general “database” region contains:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
driver: mysql
host: 127.0.0.1
database: foobar
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

And the “database” in the environment “local” contains:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
database: foobar_dev
user: root
pass: root
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The result when requesting the configuration data for the region "database" would be:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
driver: mysql
host: 127.0.0.1
database: foobar_dev
user: root
pass: root
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Note how database got overwritten by the value from the more specific
configuration in the environment “local”.

### Layered environment

One can also setup a “layered” environment, e.g. to include language and locale 
in the environment. You can set a layered environment by passing an
array to `Config::setEnvironment`.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$config->setEnvironment(array("en", "US", "local"));
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This results in the following load operations from most “general” to most
“specific”, with each operation mergin with, and overwriting, the data of the
previous ones:

1.  Load region “database”.

2.  Load region “database” from environment “en”.

3.  Load region “database” from environment “US”.

4.  Load region “database” from environment “en/US”.

5.  Load region “database” from environment “local”.

6.  Load region “database” from environment “en/local”.

7.  Load region “database” from environment “en/US/local”.

Caching
-------

All data is cached so performance is kept optimal, which is especially important
when using a layered environment with multiple resources.

Each time the environment or resource get changed the cache is emptied, so it is
best to set everything up all at once early in the request handling process.

Note that `Config::set` does not clear the cache, rather values set through this method get merged with the data from the cache.

Resources
---------

A resource can be anything that holds configuration data, like the local
filesystem, a database, a remote filesystem, etc. Resources are environment
aware, this means that when a load operation is called on the resource and an
environment is setup in the Config class, the resource will search in the
environment location and then in the default location. Currently Spanner comes
with one type of resource: LocalFilesystemResource.

### Usage

The config class provides the attachResource method to add resources.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$config->attachResource(new LocalFilesystemResource('/path/to/config'), new YamlStrategy());
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Any class implementing `Sandje\Spanner\Resource\ResourceInterface` can be
passed. See 'creating your own resource' below for details.

### LocalFilesystemResource

The local filesystem resource serves stuff that is on your local filesystem to
the config class. Upon construction of the LocalFilesystemResource object a path
to the resource location has to be passed, this can be either a file or a
directory.

#### Environments

If the LocalFilesystemResource is passed a directory a load operation without an
environment will translate to loading the contents of `./{file}.{ext}` and if an
environment is passed this will translate to `./{environment}/{file}.{ext}`.

E.g. if the resource’s path is ‘path/to/config’ with a strategy of ‘Array’ and
the region ‘database’ gets loaded while the environment is set to ‘local’ this
translates to: `path/to/config/database.php` and
`path/to/config/local/database.php`

If the LocalFilesystemResource is passed a file a load operation without an
environment will translate to loading the contents of `./{file}.{ext}` and if an
environment is passed this will translate to `./{file}.{environment}.{ext}`.

E.g. if the resource’s path is ‘path/to/config/database.php’ with a strategy of
‘Array’ and the region ‘database’ gets loaded while the environment is set to
‘local’ this translates to: `path/to/config/database.php` and
`path/to/config/database.local.php`

### Creating your own resource

If the inner workings of LocalFilesystemResource do not suit your needs you can
easily create your own resource by creating a class that implements
`\Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\ResourceInterface`. This interface consists of three
methods:

1.  A constructor which is passed the resource and a strategy (a class
    implementing `Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\Strategy\ResourceStrategyInterface`).

2.  A load method which handles the loading of the data in the passed region and
    optionally environment. The environment passed can be a string or an array.
    It also forwards the loaded data to the strategy for translation to an
    associative array. It then returns that array.

3.  A tryLoad method which is basically a wrapper for the load method and
    returns true wen the load operation was successful and false otherwise. It
    receives an array by reference as its first parameter. The result of the
    load method should be assigned to this array.

Strategies
----------

The strategy is responsible for translating the loaded data from the resource to
a multidimensional associative array. Spanner ships with the following
strategies:

-   ArrayStrategy

-   IniStrategy

-   JsonStrategy

-   XmlStrategy

-   YamlStrategy

### Usage

Set the strategy upon instantion of the resource class:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
$resource = new LocalFilesystemResource('resource', new YamlStrategy());
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### ArrayStrategy

The array strategy transates .php files from your resource. These files need to
return a single (optionally multidimensional) array. e.g.:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
<?php

return array(
    "driver"       => "mysql",
    "host"         => "127.0.0.1",
    "database"     => "foobar",
    "charset"      => "utf8",
    "collation"    => "utf8_general_ci",
    "prefix"       => "",
);
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Note: This strategy doesn't actually translate the data, but just checks that
it has a valid structure (meaning an array) and returns it.

### IniStrategy

The ini strategy translates .ini files from your resources. These files need to
be valid ini files. Sections are translated to a array. A valid ini
configuration file could look like this:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
driver=mysql
host=127.0.0.1
database=foobar
charset=utf8
collation=utf8_general_ci
prefix=
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### JsonStrategy

The json strategy translates .json files from your resources. These files need
to be valid json files with one root object. A valid json configuration file
could look like this:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
{
    "driver"        : "mysql",
    "host"          : "127.0.0.1",
    "database"      : "foobar",
    "charset"       : "utf8",
    "collation"     : "utf8_general_ci",
    "prefix"        : ""
}
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### XmlStrategy

The xml strategy translates .xml files from your resources. These files need to
be valid xml files. The element names will be mapped to array keys and the
element contents to the values for the corresponding keys. Nesting elements will
result in a multidimensional array. A xml configuration file could look like
this:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<database>
    <driver>mysql</driver>
    <host>127.0.0.1</host>
    <database>foobar</database>
    <charset>utf8</charset>
    <collation>utf8_general_ci</collation>
    <prefix></prefix>
</database>
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### YamlStrategy

The yaml strategy translates .yml files from your resources. These files need to
be valid yaml files. Symfony's Yaml package is used for loading and translating
yaml files to a (optionally multidimensional) array. A valid yaml configuration
file could look like this:

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
driver: mysql
host: 127.0.0.1
database: foobar
charset: utf8
collation: utf8_general_ci
prefix:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

### Creating your own strategy

You can easily create your own stratgy by either extending one of the existing
strategy classes that closely matches your needs or by implementing the
`\Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\Strategy\ResourceStrategyinterface`.

Additionally, to create a strategy to be used in the LocalFilesystemResource,
you need to implement the
`Sandhje\Spanner\Resource\Strategy\FilesystemResourceStrategyInterface`. This
interface defines a getFilename method which is used by the resource to get the
file to load including the correct extension.

TODO
----

-   Add database resource and strategies

-   Add docblock comment resource and strategy

-   More thorough exception handling

-   Complete documentation

-   Add to packagist

-   Finish this list ;)
